1 cup dry yellow split peas
1 tablespoon butter (can use oil or butter substitute to make this vegan)
½ medium onion , chopped
2 garlic cloves , finely minced
½ teaspoon fresh gingerroot , finely minced
2 cups low sodium vegetable broth
1 cup water
½ teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon curry powder (I prefer a mild, yellow Indian variety)
1 tablespoon cumin
½ teaspoon coriander powder
½ teaspoon turmeric
½ teaspoon chili powder (optional)
½ teaspoon garam masala (optional)
½ cup fresh cilantro , chopped for garnish (optional)

1
In a medium saucepan melt butter over medium heat. Add chopped onion and salt. Saute until soft, about five minutes. Add garlic and saute until fragrant, about 30 seconds.
2
Add remaining spices and stir. Saute for about 1 minute, cooking spices. If spices start to stick to pan, add some water - 1/4 cup should do. Add peas and stir to coat with butter, onion, and spice mixture. Add broth, 1/2 cup water and bring to boil. Cover and reduce heat to simmer.
3
Simmer for 40-50 minutes or until peas are tender and most of the liquid has been absorbed. (Check peas periodically - you may need to add more water during cooking if peas are absorbing the liquid too quickly). Garnish with chopped cilantro/coriander leaves before serving.
4
Options: Serve with hot basmati or brown rice for a filling one-dish meal. Or, double the broth/water to make a curried pea soup. To turn this into a spicy curry, add some finely chopped jalapeno, serrano, or chile pepper at the same time as the garlic.
5
Update 1/6/2010: Some people have reported issues with the peas taking longer to soften. I have never had an issue but try cooking the onions without salt and waiting until the last 10 minutes or so of cooking time to add the salt. I have heard salt interfers with lentils softening perhaps it is the same for split peas. Curry powder - I usually use a mild Indian yellow variety, the all-purpose kind found in most US supermarkets. But I have also made this with a hot Madras and it was also delicious (but spicy!).

